Since starting this YouTube channel, I've made
17 maps on different areas of physics, and one
thing I've learned is that physics itself is still
incomplete. And this is really annoying because
I want to understand things about the universe,
and there's many big mysteries that we just don't
understand. So this makes me wonder, will we ever
be able to complete physics and have a complete
understanding of the universe? Or is it actually
impossible? So in this video, I'm going to look at
some of the biggest mysteries that plague physics
today and try and gauge whether those will be one
day solvable, or whether they'll be forever
outside of our reach. And we just have to give
up on any hope that will actually ever understand
everything about the universe. So I was thinking
about what you need for a successful theory of
physics. And essentially there's eight things you
need to describe. So first you need a description
of space. So 3D space and then time. Then matter.
The stuff in that space which is mostly atoms.
And then you need to describe energy which is
basically how anything happens. So if you describe
how energy moves through matter in space and time,
that's basically all of what physics does. Okay.
So that's the first four. Now the second four.
We've got the four mechanisms of how energy can
flow around. And these are the four fundamental
forces. First, gravity, the old apple on the
head. Basically all matter in the universe weakly
attracts all other matter. Then electromagnetism.
This is basically everything else that's not
gravity. If you zoom in on any process closely
enough, it's governed by what the electrons around
atoms are doing. Mechanical processes, chemical
process, how light works. Electronics. That's all
electromagnetism. And finally the nuclear strong
and nuclear weak forces which happened inside
the nuclei of atoms. And these are important
in nuclear physics and radioactivity. But we
don't experience these day to day. So these are
the eight things that physics needs to explain.
And today we can't explain all eight with one
single theory. Okay. So the biggest problem in
modern physics is that we don't have a theory
of quantum gravity. To explain what this means,
we need to look at my map of physics for
an overview. This was actually my first
map I made on this channel. If you're new here,
I've made loads of maps about various subjects,
and if you want to get your hands on any of
these, I sell them as posters. The links are at
dosmaps.com. I'm about to go on paternity leave.
I'm having my first child. So if any of my work
has been useful to you and you want to help me
out, this is a great way to do that along with
my Patreon. So all of the links to all of that are
in the description below. Thank you. But anyway,
the map of physics: physics basically boils down
into three sections. We've got classical physics,
relativity, and quantum mechanics. Of the eight
things that physics needs to describe. Classical
physics covers these six, but it doesn't really
describe atoms. So we need quantum physics for the
strong and the weak forces. But classical physics
is really just an approximation for human scale.
So the correct description for time and space
is relativity where it split into two parts.
Special relativity puts space and time together
into a combined entity called space time. And
then general relativity describes gravity as
the curvature of that space time. Then at the
bottom we've got quantum mechanics. And that's
the accurate description of electromagnetism
matter and energy. So all we need to do is join
quantum mechanics and relativity together. And
then we'd have a theory of everything, a theory
of quantum gravity. Now people have been trying
to do this and have managed to jam quantum
mechanics and special relativity together into
a theory called quantum field theory. But whenever
anyone has tried putting general relativity and
its description of gravity into quantum field
theory, it doesn't work. There's a fundamental
incompatibility with the smooth, continuous
nature of space time and the blocky, chunky
nature of quantum mechanics. And if you smash all
the mass together, you end up getting infinities
and paradoxes, and it doesn't work. People have
been trying to do this for over a hundred years,
unsuccessfully. So for now, a theory of quantum
gravity is on the other side of the chasm of
ignorance, along with other big mysteries like
dark matter and dark energy. Dark matter is
basically some form of unknown matter that makes
up 85% of the universe. We know what makes up the
normal matter, and that's described by the
Standard Model of particle physics. But this
is only 15% of the universe. We probably won't
need a theory of quantum gravity to explain dark
matter. People think it's just another kind of
particle that only interacts via gravity and not
the other forces. But we're still figuring that
out. Dark energy is quite different. Dark energy
might be another kind of force that we'd have to
add to these four. Basically, at the large scale,
the universe is expanding, but not just expanding.
The expansion keeps speeding up, accelerating over
time. So there must be some force or energy
pushing everything outwards. We don't know
what this is, so we called it dark energy. It
seems like space itself has some inherent energy,
which could perhaps be explained by theory of
quantum gravity. But we don't know that for
sure yet. I've made a deeper dive video all about
quantum gravity. If you want to find out more,
watch that. But for this video, what I really
want to know is if will ever be able to get to
a theory of quantum gravity at all, because we
need it to explain two of the big mysteries in
physics black holes and the Big Bang: the origin
of the universe. This is my map of black holes,
and basically we don't understand what's
going on inside them. Black holes are such
an extreme environment in the universe that
gravity and quantum mechanics simply can't
ignore each other. So to understand black holes,
we need to have that theory of quantum gravity
and for similar reasons, for the Big Bang at
the start of the universe, as we know it was
like 13.8 billion years ago. The whole universe,
according to our best models, was squished into a
tiny subatomic volume. So we need to have a theory
of quantum gravity for that original form of the
universe as well. And here's a crazy thing
about the Big Bang. As the universe expanded,
there's a point here where the matter was spread
out enough for light to escape and we can see
that first light today is radio waves. It's this
the cosmic microwave background. And this is the
furthest away thing we can ever see with light.
This is the entire night sky. So this covers
every direction and these grains of color. You can
see this is the granularity of quantum mechanics
frozen in time from when the universe was tiny
and now has been stretched out to the size of
the observable universe. So the smallest things
in the universe now stretched over the biggest
things in the universe. So here's the situation
we're in. Our theories of quantum gravity don't
work. Our best attempts like string theory
and loop quantum gravity, they don't give us
any testable predictions. And this is how science
is supposed to work. If you've got a new theory,
you need to be able to test it with a prediction.
And we don't have any from those theories. The
other way you can go about it is if you've got no
theories that are working, you need some new data,
something that can give you a new clue about
what's going on. So what experiments could we
do for quantum gravity? So the first option is a
giant particle accelerator like the one at CERN,
but way bigger. And you build this to find out if
there's a quantum particle for gravity. So people
have hypothesized this particle. It's called a
graviton. And to get enough energy, you'd need
to build a particle accelerator the size of our
solar system with detectors the size of Jupiter.
And as soon as you run it, you'd create a black
hole. So that's not practically going to be built
anytime soon. Another way you could take is to
try and delve down into the quantum realm and
make incredibly sensitive measurements of gravity.
So there's gravity everywhere. So there should
be gravitons everywhere. But they're incredibly
difficult to detect because gravity is such a weak
force. So one idea is to get a massive chunk of
metal about one ton and cool it down really cold
to get rid of all the vibrational energy inside
it, and then wait until a graviton bumps into it
to make it vibrate a teeny bit. So you'd need
a ton of metal cooled close to absolute zero,
and practically this is easier than that solar
system sized particle accelerator. But this is
still way beyond what we can do today, and it
might be physically impossible to protect this
detector from other sources of vibrations like
cosmic rays or neutrinos, which might hide the
gravitons. Also, both of these approaches assume
that a particle of gravity exists. That's a very
quantum way of looking at gravity, but we don't
know gravity works like that. It might work in a
different way and not have particles. Currently
with no experiments we can run our best option
are observations of space specifically of
gravitational waves. Gravitational waves
are ripples in space time. These were predicted
by the laws of general relativity and then first
discovered in 2017. these gravitational waves
could be the best chance we currently have to get
some clue to point us towards a theory of quantum
gravity. We can currently detect gravitational
waves from Earth of black hole collisions. And
there's a plan to make a much larger space based
detector called LISA. LISA is planned to launch
in the mid 2030s, although this date keeps getting
pushed back. I've basically been following the
mission since the 1990s, but if this does launch
within my lifetime, it should be able to detect
primordial gravitational waves from the Big Bang.
These primordial gravitational waves come from
fractions of a second after the Big Bang. And
these are the earliest signals we could get from
the origins of the universe. Way before the cosmic
microwave background, which is the earliest we
can currently see. There might also be faint
signals of these primordial gravitational waves
in the cosmic microwave background itself. These
are called B-mode polarization patterns. And
this is the quickest route to try and see them.
There's loads of telescopes trying to measure this
currently. So to understand the universe, we need
to have a theory of quantum gravity. And these are
our best options to try and find one. So it looks
like it might take a while. But here's the kicker
even if we did have a theory of quantum gravity
right now, there's still things about the universe
that we know we'll never know. For example,
inside black holes, we'll never know what's going
on inside them. We can only ever guess, because
anything that goes into a black hole never comes
out. So no information can ever escape from the
inside of a black hole, so we'll never know what's
going on inside them. Similarly, we'll never know
what happened at the very, very early universe.
The origins of the Big Bang, what caused it,
anything like that. Because there's no information
in the universe that could tell us similarly
beyond the observable universe. So we can see a
patch of the universe, which is, 48 billion light
years in radius. Beyond that, we don't know what's
happening there. Physics could be different,
or it could be full of anti-matter or whatever.
We'll never know. So unfortunately, the conclusion
of this video is we will never fully understand
the universe. And so as a physicist, that's a
bit sad because our knowledge, could never be
complete. But isn't it incredible that we can even
ask these questions? We like this little corner
of the universe that's been evolved and arranged
in this way, where we can actually look out and
question why everything is the way it is, and then
perform experiments and do observations to try and
figure out these theories. It's like the Earth is
a floating museum of the possibilities of the laws
of nature. And I think that's incredibly precious.
I've recently been thinking about the uniqueness
of life on Earth, and how sad it is when a plant
or animal or fungi species goes extinct. Because
these are unique configurations of the universe
that if they die, they'll never exist again. And
this is why recently, with everything else that's
been going on in the world I’ve been wanting to
do something proactive and positive to help out
against biodiversity loss. So I've recently joined
a community of people who have come together to
help protect environments and species by pooling
their resources together. It's called Planet Wild,
and I've actually partnered with them for this
video. As as an individual, it's often easy to
feel a bit helpless when thinking about
what we can do to help the environment.
But through Planet Wild, over 20,000 members
come together to pull resources to fund a new,
carefully selected mission each month to bring
back endangered species, protect our oceans,
restore forests and many, many more projects
which you can find on the Planet World app. You
can see all of the projects that have been funded
to date, things from saving pangolins from illegal
trafficking through to protecting the world's
fungi and what I really like about this is all
of the traceability. All of the missions are
documented. They're all right here on YouTube
on the Planet Wild YouTube channel. So I can go
there and I can see what my contributions have
achieved every month. And another thing I really
like is they show exactly who they're working
with on the ground, and specifically what the
funding has accomplished. You can sign up for a
monthly membership for any amount, big or small.
Literally every little bit helps. And also the
first 100 people to sign up using my code domain
four will get their first month paid for by me.
Just scan this QR code or click on the link in the
description below. After that, there's no catch.
You can cancel any time. Personally, I'm finding
it very valuable to feel like I'm contributing,
at least in some small way, to push the world
in a more positive direction. So if this sounds
interesting and you'd like to find out more,
please check out Planet World through these
links. And also, if you want to see their work on
fungi preservation, check out their video here.
And if you want to see why I think fungi are so
cool. I've got a really good overview here. All
right, that's it for me. Thank you so much for
watching and I will see you on the next video.